\subsection{Paper-Based Voting}

The oldest and most frequent voting mechanism is the paper ballot system.   In a normal paper-based election, voters write their choices on paper ballots (by hand or with a stamp), which are then gathered in sealed boxes and then counted, either manually or by optical scanners.   This system has been the backbone of democratic elections for centuries and remains in use globally due to its simplicity and transparency.

  \textbf  {Strengths:}   The primary strength of paper voting is its tangibility and verifiability.   Each vote is a lasting physical document that may be examined and recounted if needed.   This generates a natural audit trail and renders the system impervious to cyber attacks -- you cannot hack a paper ballot that’s sitting in a sealed box.   Paper votes are also easily understood by voters; there is inherent transparency in viewing a count by hand, for example.   Moreover, individual mistakes (like a misprinted ballot or a small batch of missing ballots) frequently do not have systemic influence; they may be identified and remedied in one precinct without impacting others.   Another advantage is that paper voting requires little technology, which is perfect in regions with poor infrastructure or where inserting complicated gear could arouse suspicions.   Election authorities frequently mention the motto: ``paper is sturdy and hard to hack.''   Indeed, amid worries about electronic voting, numerous experts have urged a return to paper-based systems or at least the use of voter-verified paper backups as the safest approach~\cite{brookings2018paper}.   Paper ballots, when complemented with stringent procedures (like signature verification for postal ballots or permanent ink to prevent multiple voting in person), can achieve high integrity and inclusiveness.

  \textbf  {Challenges:}   Despite their advantages, paper-based systems are not without challenges.   One difficulty is manual handling and human error: during counting, especially in large elections, humans might make mistakes tallying results or interpreting voter markings (e.g., what makes a valid mark can be subjective -- as evidenced in the notorious ``hanging chads'' from punch-card votes in 2000).   Counting millions of ballots by hand is time-consuming and can delay results.   Even with optical scanners speeding up counts, those scanners must be well-calibrated and tested (they too could err or misread ambiguous marks).   Another challenge is security and chain-of-custody: ballots must be protected from the moment they are cast until the final count is certified.   There have been incidents of voting boxes being ``stuffed'' with fraudulent ballots, or lawful ballots being lost, destroyed, or manipulated by unscrupulous officials.   In other words, while you cannot hack a piece of paper remotely, fraud can occur by physical means -- ballot stuffing, ballot theft, or swapping valid ballots with forgeries.   Robust election procedures and monitoring are required to mitigate this; for example, requiring that members of political parties accompany all ballot transfers, placing tamper-evident seals on ballot boxes, and criminal penalties for intervention.   In situations with inadequate rule of law, paper ballots alone do not ensure fair elections -- they might be prone to old-fashioned kinds of cheating.   Additionally, entirely paper systems can be less accessible for voters with certain disabilities (though many places incorporate resources like braille ballots or assistance in the voting booth).   For remote voters (e.g., individuals abroad), paper voting often entails postal voting, which can be slow and adds dependency on postal services.

  \textbf  {Current Use and Trend:}   Many countries that experimented with entirely electronic voting have reverted to paper-based ballots (often with machine counting) to harness the reliability of a tangible record.   For instance, Germany’s Supreme Court decided in 2009 that voting must be clear to the normal voter, thereby supporting paper over sophisticated technology.   The consensus among many professionals today is that paper ballots, along with current technology for counting and auditing, strike a wise compromise between security and efficiency~\cite{brookings2018paper}.   They are not immune to fraud or error, but the techniques of fraud in paper systems (stuffing, etc.) typically leave evidence or involve large-scale conspiracies that are impossible to execute without exposure~\cite{sri2010paper}.   This fundamental security through transparency is a primary reason paper ballots are still considered a benchmark, and why even modern systems like voting machines are advised to generate voter-verifiable paper trails as a check on the electronic count.

\subsection{Electronic Voting Machines}

Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) refer broadly to devices that electronically record and count votes. This category includes Direct-Recording Electronic (DRE) machines with touchscreens or buttons, as well as electronic ballot markers that assist voters in making selections which are then printed or stored. EVMs are used in polling stations to streamline the voting process by eliminating manual ballot marking and directly capturing voter choices in digital form.

\textbf {Operation:} A typical DRE machine presents the ballot to the voter via a screen. The voter makes selections, for example by touching candidate names or pressing buttons next to options. The machine may provide a summary screen for review and then a “Cast Vote” button. Once cast, the vote is recorded to the machine’s memory (often redundant memory, e.g. internal flash and a removable memory card). In older DREs, that was the end of it – the digital records were the official votes. Newer or updated machines often also print a paper record (VVPAT) that the voter can review through a window. That paper record is kept in the machine and can be used for audits or recounts. At the end of the day, the machine tallies all votes and produces results, either displayed on-screen, printed on a results tape, or transmitted electronically to a central tabulator. EVMs can also include optical scan machines (where the voter marks a paper and feeds it into a scanner). Here, we focus on direct-entry machines which remove the need for a physical ballot filled out by the voter.

\textbf {Advantages:} The appeal of EVMs lies in their speed and convenience. They can reduce the number of spoiled ballots because the interface can prevent over-votes (choosing too many candidates) or warn about under-votes (if a race was left blank). They can accommodate multiple languages and accessibility features, ensuring voters with disabilities can vote independently (audio prompts for blind voters, sip-and-puff interfaces for voters with limited mobility, etc.). EVMs also produce immediate counts: as soon as the polls close, results can be computed at the touch of a button, significantly faster than manual counting. This quick reporting is often cited as a benefit in large elections with complex ballots. Additionally, they eliminate certain costs like printing large numbers of paper ballots for every election (though this cost may be replaced by technology procurement and maintenance costs). In places like India, a simplified EVM (battery-powered device with buttons) has drastically reduced the logistical burden of conducting huge elections, as the devices are lighter and easier to transport than millions of paper ballots, and counting is completed within hours instead of days.

Furthermore, when properly designed, EVMs can reduce some human errors. For example, in jurisdictions with instant-runoff voting or complex vote tally rules, software can ensure the calculations are done exactly to specification, avoiding potential mistakes in manual tallies. From the voter’s perspective, the experience can be more straightforward (touching a name instead of correctly filling a small oval). EVMs also can enforce one person, one vote within each machine by not accepting a second ballot without authorization (though that is also easily done with paper by procedures).

\textbf {Security Concerns:} Despite these advantages, EVMs have significant weaknesses, particularly in security and transparency, as discussed in Chapter 2. A major problem is that the ordinary voter or observer cannot directly see what the machine is doing internally. If a paper ballot is hand-counted in front of observers, there’s little doubt as to the result. But if an EVM says Candidate A got 100 votes and Candidate B 80 votes, one must trust that the machine recorded those correctly. Any software bug or malicious code could undetectably alter the count. In the 2000s, studies famously demonstrated that some DREs could be hacked to swap votes between candidates or to mis-record a percentage of votes, all while presenting a normal interface to the voter \cite{uconnEVM}. Without a paper trail, such attacks might never be uncovered. This led to a strong push for VVPAT printers on machines. However, not all voters carefully verify the paper record, and recounts are rare unless a result is contested or very close, so even VVPAT is not a perfect safeguard.

Another security issue is that many EVMs were built on outdated software platforms with poor security hardening. Investigations have found instances of factory-default passwords, unsecured ports, and unsigned firmware updates in machines, allowing relatively unsophisticated attackers to gain control \cite{uconnEVM}. If attackers can get physical access (or in some cases, remote access if machines transmit data), they could manipulate results or install malware that spreads, as noted earlier. Modern EVMs are improving on this (with encryption, secure boot, etc.), but older models in use may remain vulnerable.

\textbf {Transparency and Trust:} Because of these concerns, public trust in EVMs can be fragile. Notably, after observing problems and potential hacks, the Netherlands and Ireland scrapped their DRE voting machines around 2007, returning to paper ballots. In the United States, after the 2004 and 2006 elections saw controversies with paperless DREs, many states moved to require paper trails or switched to optical scan systems. Essentially, officials realized that any purely electronic count should be verifiable by a parallel independent record. The ongoing consensus is that if EVMs are to be used, they must produce a voter-verified paper audit trail and those paper records should be used in random audits to double-check the electronic results \cite{brookingsEVM}.

\textbf {Operational Issues:} Beyond security, EVMs introduce other challenges. Machines can malfunction – e.g., touchscreens misalign (causing “vote flipping” where touching near one candidate selects another), or memory can fail. There have been instances of machines not starting up on election morning, causing delays. With paper ballots, a contingency is straightforward (use reserve paper ballots if a scanner fails); with DREs, if the machine fails, voting at that station stops unless backup machines are available or paper emergency ballots are provided. Thus, contingency planning is crucial.

Additionally, EVMs can be costly. They require storage in secure facilities, regular maintenance, pre-election testing (logic and accuracy tests), and often per-machine or per-district programming to configure ballots. These all introduce administrative complexity and potential points of failure (e.g., if the wrong ballot file is loaded, a machine could present incorrect contests to voters).

\subsection{Online Voting}

Online voting (remote internet voting) allows voters to cast ballots from their own computers or mobile devices, transmitting their choices over the internet to election servers. Unlike polling-place e-voting (which is supervised), online voting typically happens in an unsupervised setting – e.g., a voter at home or abroad logs into a web portal or app to vote. This method has been implemented in a limited number of cases around the world and remains the subject of considerable debate.

\textbf {Implementation and Examples:} The most notable government implementation is in Estonia, which has offered internet voting (i-voting) in national elections since 2005. Estonian voters authenticate using a government-issued digital ID card or mobile ID, then cast their vote via a secure website; the system encrypts the vote and the voter can even change their online vote multiple times (only the last one counts, to mitigate coercion) until the online voting period ends \cite{jhalderm}. Switzerland has also trialed online voting for expatriates in several cantons, using systems developed in partnership with private providers. Canada has seen municipal elections (e.g., some Ontario towns) with optional online voting. In the United States, outright online voting for public offices is rare (due to security warnings), but some states have allowed email return of ballots for military voters or small-scale blockchain-based pilots for overseas voters (e.g., West Virginia’s 2018 pilot for military voters using a blockchain app). Additionally, many non-governmental elections (unions, university councils, corporate shareholder votes) have adopted online voting platforms.

\textbf {Advantages:} The primary driver for online voting is convenience and accessibility. It enables people to vote from anywhere in the world without needing to travel to a polling station or mail a ballot. This is particularly attractive for voters abroad, military personnel, or homebound individuals. By lowering the barrier to voting, online systems aim to increase turnout. Estonia, for instance, has consistently seen about 30\% of votes cast online in recent elections, suggesting many voters prefer that option for its ease. Online voting can also be more efficient for administrators in certain ways: no physical ballot printing, automated tallying, and instant preliminary results once polls close. Costs for ballot handling and staffing polling sites might be reduced (though these savings could be offset by IT and security costs). Another advantage is timely delivery of ballots – overseas voters using postal mail often face delays, whereas an online system can make ballots available instantly and receive them back in seconds, eliminating issues like mail reliability. Furthermore, online voting can incorporate real-time checks – for example, if a voter has already voted, the system can prevent double voting (similar to an e-pollbook in precincts), or if a voter is not eligible for a certain contest, the software can enforce that. In theory, advanced cryptographic systems for online voting could provide end-to-end verifiability, allowing voters to confirm their vote was counted without revealing the vote itself. However, such systems are still mostly experimental.

\textbf {Security Concerns and Criticisms:} Despite its appeal, online voting is often described by experts as high-risk given today’s cybersecurity landscape. The main challenge is the lack of a trusted voting environment. Voters use personal devices that may be compromised with malware or spyware, and connect via insecure networks. An attacker controlling a voter’s device could alter their vote before submission, or intercept the transmission. Because votes are transmitted over the internet, servers and transmission paths become targets for denial-of-service attacks or intrusions. Without a reliable independent paper record, verifying that votes were recorded as cast and counted as recorded is difficult. Moreover, anonymity must be preserved alongside verifiability, adding complexity.

Many security experts argue that current technology cannot guarantee both voter privacy and election integrity simultaneously in online voting. A 2015 report by the U.S. Association for Computing Machinery concluded that internet voting should not be used in public elections until robust end-to-end verifiable voting systems are available \cite{acm2015_report}. Others have highlighted risks that elections could be influenced by state-level actors or cybercriminal groups.

Several incidents illustrate these vulnerabilities. Trials in Switzerland and Canada have been halted after security flaws were found, including software bugs and potential vote alteration risks. Attempts to run online voting pilots in the United States have faced strong opposition from cybersecurity experts. In 2018, West Virginia’s blockchain voting pilot was restricted to overseas military voters, partly because it was recognized that scaling such systems securely is challenging.

\textbf {Blockchain Voting:} In recent years, some have proposed using blockchain technology as a solution for online voting, arguing that the decentralized ledger could provide transparency and tamper resistance. While blockchain can offer a verifiable audit trail and reduce the need for centralized trust, it does not solve many core problems: compromised voter devices, denial-of-service attacks, and the difficulty of secret ballot protections remain unsolved. Blockchain voting systems also tend to be complex, with few real-world implementations at scale. A 2020 analysis concluded that blockchain does not eliminate the core threats of internet voting and could add complexity without substantially improving security \cite{grimsby2020}.




summarize this
